API intro content (#548)
vegaprotocol/documentation: docs/api/overview.md

---
title: API Overview
sidebar_position: 1
vega_network: TESTNET
---

import Topic from '/docs/topics/_topic-development.mdx'
import DataNodes from '@site/src/components/DataNodes';
import EthAddresses from '@site/src/components/EthAddresses';

<Topic />

## Introduction

> The Vega protocol forms a blockchain specifically built to support trading of financial products on markets proposed and voted on by members of the Vega community.

Author: replace blockchain with network?

> The Vega protocol forms a blockchain specifically built to support trading of financial products on markets proposed and voted on by members of the Vega community.

Author: ```suggestion
The Vega protocol provides the backbone to form a network specifically built to support trading of financial products on markets proposed and voted on by members of the Vega community.
```

As most of the APIs are designed to be used for trading-related queries, the best place to try them out is on the testnet network, also known as Fairground. The public endpoints differ between testnet and mainnet, as do the network configurations your Vega-compatible wallet needs in order to connect. See the public endpoints page for details. You can switch between documentation of the networks' software versions in the top menu bar on every page.

The easiest way to get started with Vega programmatically is by using REST. There are also [gRPC](./grpc/overview.md) and [GraphQL](./graphql/generated.md) endpoints geared towards users with specific requirements. For more about the endpoints they provide, go to their specific sections.

Because Vega is a decentralised network run by independent validators, there are a number of different servers that you'll need to interact while working with the network - data will generally be recieved from one service and transactions will be sent to another. See the [the next section on data flow](#data-flow).

## Data flow

> Most of the data you will want to access will come from the trading data REST service. This is served by a 'data node' - servers that read the blockchain and produce a database of the current state, and in some cases store the past state. These data nodes are where you will read data from. 

Author: ```suggestion
Most of the data you will want to access will come from the trading data REST service. This is served by a 'data node' - servers that read from the event stream (event queue), from a Vega core node and produce a database of the current state, and in some cases store the past state. These data nodes are where you will read data from. 
```

confirm- "vega core node"?

> To 'write' to the chain - that is to send in a transaction - you will use a Vega wallet, which will sign your transactions and send them to a validator node to be included in the chain.

Author: ```suggestion
To send in a transaction - you will use a Vega wallet, which will sign your transactions and send them to a validator node to be included in the chain.
```

> ![How data cycles through the Vega network](/img/concept-diagrams/data-flow-vega.png)

Author: signed transaction goes to chain, then vega core node, then events (for imagery

> 

Author: how can we express that core is also readable. 

diagram idea: components of a system, pull the apis from core service, be from be service, etc.

The Vega core processes each transaction in order, from a block that's been created by Tendermint and then executing the transaction. When the transaction is being executed, it will trigger actions in the core. For example, an order submission could enter the order book, match other orders, trigger trades, etc. The core is comprised of the order books, risk engines, governance mechanisms, market lifecycle, and other essential protocol functions.

![Simplified view of the transaction flow](/img/concept-diagrams/transactions-flow-easy.png)

## Authentication
Authentication takes several forms when interacting with Vega. When requesting data, such as through a query, you don't need to authenticate nor do you need an API token. 

If you want to interact with the network, you'll need to ensure that you have a Vega Wallet, which provides authentication in the form of a signature when sending transactions. 

When creating any scripts or software to interact with Vega, you'll need a wallet authentication token. See the [Wallet API guides to get started](./vega-wallet/before-you-start.md).

## Sending transactions to the chain

> When sending transactions, you'll need a Vega Wallet with at least one keypair, and have the wallet service running. You'll also need to have your Vega public key (also known as a party ID) to hand, as well as the relevant transaction data, in order to submit your transaction.

Author: ```suggestion
When sending transactions, you'll need a Vega Wallet with at least one keypair, and have the wallet service running. You'll need to have your Vega public key (also known as a party ID) to hand, as well as the relevant transaction data, in order to submit your transaction.
```

When your client needs to sends a transaction, it fills in the details and passes it to the wallet to be signed, and forwarded to a validator node before being added to a block.

> 

Author: Add a sentence about client-side PoW and link to concepts

> When your client needs to sends a transaction, it fills in the details and passes it to the wallet to be signed, and forwarded to a validator node before being added to a block.

Author: ```suggestion
When your client needs to sends a transaction, it fills in the details and passes it to the wallet. The wallet provides a client-side proof-of-work calculation, signs the transaction and forwards it to a validator node before it is added to a block.
```

## Versioning
Once the latest code is prepared for a release, it's deployed to a testnet, where the latest features and updates can be trialled. When the validator node operators agree that a version is sufficiently stable to be released to mainnet, all code from that version and the previous versions are used to upgrade the network. 

Find out what version a data node is running with the [data node info endpoint](./rest/data-v2/trading-data-service-info.api.mdx).

Breaking APIs changes go through a deprecation cycle, and are announced in the summary for each [release](../releases/overview.md).

The documentation on this site covers the core software version running on the Vega testnet, and the version on the Vega mainnet. Check which version's documentation you're viewing (and switch between them) by referring to the top navigation bar for each page. 

See the [releases page](../releases/overview.md) for a summary of each software release and links to the full changelog on GitHub. 

## REST APIs

> REST provides endpoints for querying for trading data, account information, ledger movements, asset and market information, and much more.

Author: Specify that these are coming from three different areas/IP addresses/etc. And that the recommendation is to query the data node

* **Trading data API** providers historic information and cumulative data, and covers a wide range of data, including, but not limited to:
  * liquidity provisions
  * network limits and parameters
  * information about validator and non-validator nodes
  * reward summaries
  * governance proposals and votes
* **Core service API**: Provides the minimum state of the chain required to build and send a transaction. This is also exposed in the trading data API.
* **Explorer API**: Provides transaction details, designed particularly to support the development of block explorers.

> * **Core state API**: This API is specifically for node operators, and may not be exposed by nodes running the network. All methods under this umbrella are also available on the trading data endpoints.

Author: ```suggestion
* **Core state API**: This API is specifically for node operators, and may not be exposed by nodes running the network. All methods under this umbrella are also available on the trading data endpoints, which are recommended for querying.
```

---
title: API Overview
sidebar_position: 1
vega_network: TESTNET
---

import Topic from '/docs/topics/_topic-development.mdx'
import DataNodes from '@site/src/components/DataNodes';
import EthAddresses from '@site/src/components/EthAddresses';

<Topic />

## Introduction
The Vega protocol provides the backbone to form a network specifically built to support trading of financial products on markets proposed and voted on by members of the Vega community.

There are several ways to interact with Vega through APIs and smart contracts, and below you can learn more about the overall technical structure, the reference documentation, and tutorials that are currently available.

As most of the APIs are designed to be used for trading-related queries, the best place to try them out is on the testnet network, also known as Fairground. The public endpoints differ between testnet and mainnet, as do the network configurations your Vega-compatible wallet needs in order to connect. See the public endpoints page for details. You can switch between documentation of the networks' software versions in the top menu bar on every page.

> The easiest way to get started with Vega programmatically is by using REST. There are also [gRPC](./grpc/overview.md) and [GraphQL](./graphql/generated.md) endpoints geared towards users with specific requirements. For more about the endpoints they provide, go to their specific sections.

Author: This sounds a lot like nudging people towards using gRPC, don't you think @barnabee? If we're meant to be "going all in on REST", telling people all the reasons they should use gRPC seems to go against that.

Because Vega is a decentralised network run by independent validators, there are a number of different servers that you'll need to interact while working with the network - data will generally be recieved from one service and transactions will be sent to another. See the [the next section on data flow](#data-flow).

## Data flow
Most of the data you will want to access will come from the trading data REST service. This is served by a 'data node' - servers that read from the event stream (event queue), from a Vega core node and produce a database of the current state, and in some cases store the past state. These data nodes are where you will read data from. 

> To send in a transaction - you'll need to use a Vega wallet, which will combine your command with a signature and public key, and send that bundle, which makes up the transaction, to a validator node to be included in the chain.

Author: @barnabee I think then it's worth signposting that anyone who uses a signer library will need to be fully aware of the spam limitations and the PoW required - which the wallet software handles for the user.

It's implemented with the following headers in each API response:
* `RateLimit-Limit` The maximum request limit within the time window (1s)
* `RateLimit-Reset` The rate-limiter time window duration in seconds (always 1s)
* `RateLimit-Remaining` The remaining tokens

Upon rejection, the following HTTP response headers are available:
* `X-Rate-Limit-Limit` The maximum request limit
* `X-Rate-Limit-Duration` The rate-limiter duration
* `X-Rate-Limit-Request-Forwarded-For` The rejected request X-Forwarded-For.
* `X-Rate-Limit-Request-Remote-Addr` The rejected request RemoteAddr.

If a client continues to make requests despite having no tokens available, the response will be `HTTP 429 StatusTooManyRequests for HTTP APIs`.

Each unsuccessful response will deduct a token from a separate bucket with the same refill rate and capacity as the requests bucket. Exhausting the supply of tokens in this second bucket will result in the client's IP address being banned for a period of time determined by the data node operators, with 10 minutes as the default.

> If banned, the reponse will be `HTTP 403 Forbidden for HTTP APIs`.

Author: @barnabee It's currently implemented such that 429 is the code when you get rate limited, 403 is the code for when you get banned for continuing to overdo it (as mentioned in the paragraphs above this). Do you think it should be the same response for both?

Vega is a public, decentralised network run by independent validators. 

There are a number of different servers that you'll need to interact while working with the network - data will generally be recieved from one service and transactions will be sent to another using data nodes. See the [data flow section on the architecture page](./architecture.md#data-flow).

:::caution Supplying your own data
Anyone that plans to build significant integrations, trading bots, or power backed services should expect to run their own data node, or collaborate with a data node provider, if one exists. 
:::

## Authentication
Authentication takes several forms when interacting with Vega. When requesting data from a standard data node, such as through a query, you don't need to authenticate nor do you need an API token. Service providers offering free or paid data nodes may require you to authenticate, however. If this is the case you will need to refer to the provider's documentation for details of how to do so.

If you want to submit transactions to the network, you'll need to ensure that you have a Vega Wallet, which provides authentication in the form of a signature when sending transactions. 

> When creating any scripts or software to interact with Vega, you'll need a wallet authentication token. 

Reviewer: that's quite specific to the desktop wallet. I'm not sure what I'll change but probably write something differtnt

Author: If you want to write software to interact with the wallet, you'll need an API token whether or not you expect the user to use a desktop wallet... no?

:::note Go deeper
**[Wallet API guides](./vega-wallet/before-you-start.md)**: See the wallet API documentation for more on authentication tokens.
:::

## Sending transactions to the chain
When sending transactions, you'll need a Vega Wallet with at least one keypair, and have the wallet service running. You'll need to have your Vega public key (also known as a party ID) to hand, as well as the relevant transaction data, in order to submit your transaction.

To access the Vega network, the wallet needs to be configured with the location of one of more [data nodes](./architecture.md#data-nodes).

> When your client wants to send a transaction using the Vega wallet API, it will construct the transaction in JSON and pass it to the wallet. The wallet performs a client-side proof-of-work calculation, signs the transaction and forwards it to a validator node before it is added to a block. It is also possible to have the wallet sign a transaction without sending it, if needed. Alternatively, you can build the signer into your client, though you'll need to account for the PoW calculations.

Reviewer: It's said a couple of other times here, but the transaction is not specifically sent to a validator node. It's sent to a node on the network, which implement the CoreService grpc service. This is implemented by either a datanode api, core full node api or core validator.

:::note Go deeper
* **[Transactions](./../concepts/vega-chain/transactions.md)**: Learn about transactions, commands, validation, and ordering.
* **[Commands API](./grpc/vega/commands/v1/commands.proto)** See a full list of transaction types. 
:::

### Transaction hashes
Once a transaction has been successfully submitted to the chain, you receive the transaction's hash from the wallet. A transaction hash is a unique identifier for the transaction, and can be used to find that transaction and check its status on a Vega block explorer. Note that a transaction can only be seen by the block explorer once it's been processed by the network and been propagated to the Vega node on the block explorer backend.

> Depending on transaction type, most will be given a deterministic ID, derived from the transaction hash, which is specific to the object the transaction creates once it's processed. You can use that object-specific ID with the relevant endpoint to then get richer, more detailed information about it. 

Reviewer: it's derived from the signature not tranactrion hash.
